The Project Gutenberg eBook of Angel's Christmas, and, Little Dot
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Angel's Christmas, and, Little Dot


Author: Mrs. O. F. Walton

Release date: October 29, 2023 [eBook #71977]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society, 1905


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANGEL'S CHRISTMAS, AND, LITTLE DOT ***
Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration: "HERE'S WRITING AT THE BEGINNING, MOTHER;
 WHAT DOES IT SAY?"]



                         ANGEL'S CHRISTMAS

                                 AND

                             LITTLE DOT


                                 BY

                         MRS. O. F. WALTON

                              AUTHOR OF
            "THE MYSTERIOUS HOUSE," "PEEP BEHIND THE SCENES,"
         "CHRISTIE, THE KING'S SERVANT," "WINTER'S FOLLY," ETC.



                               LONDON
                     THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
            4 BOUVERIE STREET AND 65 ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD



                              CONTENTS

ANGEL'S CHRISTMAS

     CHAPTER I. THE WINGLESS ANGEL

     CHAPTER II. WHO KNOCKS?

     CHAPTER III. LITTLE ELLIE'S SISTER

     CHAPTER IV. THE LOUD KNOCK IN PLEASANT PLACE

     CHAPTER V. ANGEL'S BIRTHDAY

     CHAPTER VI. THE GREAT BIRTHDAY

LITTLE DOT

     CHAPTER I. OLD SOLOMON'S VISITOR

     CHAPTER II. DOT'S DAISIES

     CHAPTER III. THE LITTLE GRAVE

     CHAPTER IV. LILIAN AND HER WORDS

     CHAPTER V. DOT'S BUSY THOUGHTS

     CHAPTER VI. SOWING SEEDS

     CHAPTER VII. THE LITTLE WHITE STONE

     CHAPTER VIII. THE FADING DAISY

     CHAPTER IX. OLD SOLOMON'S HOPE



                       ANGEL'S CHRISTMAS

CHAPTER I

THE WINGLESS ANGEL

FROM morning till night, poor Mrs. Blyth was hard at work with her
great mangle.

It was a very dismal room; no one could call it anything else. The
window was very small, several of the panes patched together with
pieces of brown paper, and the dust and the spiders had been very busy
trying how much sunshine they could keep from coming into the gloomy
little room.

Yet one could hardly blame poor Mrs. Blyth very much, for she had a
hard life and plenty to do. A drunken husband, a mangle, and five
children! No wonder that she had not time to look after the spiders!

The mangle filled up at least half of the room, and from early morning
till late at night it was going backwards and forwards, almost without
stopping. When Mrs. Blyth was making dinner ready, Angel turned; and
when Angel was eating her dinner with her little brothers and sisters,
Mrs. Blyth turned again. And in this way the mangle was almost always
going; and old Mrs. Sawyer, lying on her bed next door, would quite
have missed the noise it made rolling backwards and forwards, which
acted as a kind of lullaby to her the whole week long.

Little Angel was standing by the door with a large clothes-basket in
her arms, waiting for it to be filled. She was the eldest of the five
children, and she was not quite seven years old. She was very small,
and her little figure was a good deal bent with turning the heavy
mangle. She had to stand on a stool to turn it, and it made her back
ache. But that did not matter,—the mangle must be turned, or they would
have no dinner to-morrow.

And now the clothes must be carried home; and they were a very heavy
load.

"Is all these for Mrs. Douglas, mother?" said little Angel, when
the flannels, and dusters, and towels, and stockings were all piled
carefully into the basket.

"Yes, child; there's just six and a half dozen. Now mind you don't
spill any of them."

Little Angel tried to lift the great basket, but it was more than she
could manage; the blood rushed into her little pale face with the
effort.

"Tim will help you," said her mother. "Go and call him; I'll give him a
slice of treacle and bread, if he'll come."

Tim, who was a neighbour's little boy, agreed to the bargain, and the
two children started together.

On they toiled through the wet and muddy streets, almost without
speaking, until little Angel paused before a large house in one of the
grander streets of that small town.

"Who lives here?" said Tim, as he glanced up at the bow windows and at
the great door with pillars on each side of it.

"This is where we're going," said Angel. "These are Mrs. Douglas's
clothes. Help me to carry them in."

So the children went by a long passage to the back door.

They rang twice before any one came to open it; and then the cook came
to the door with a very red face, and with very white hands, for she
was in the midst of baking.

"You'll have to wait a minute or two," she said; "come inside and put
your basket down; it's Miss Ellie's birthday, and I'm very busy. I'll
take them out of the basket when these cakes are done."

The two children stood on the mat by the kitchen door, and looked
around them. There was a large fire, and the cook was taking a
number of little cakes from the oven shelf. They were curious little
cakes, of all shapes and sizes. Some were round, some square, some
diamond-shaped: some were like birds, some like fishes, some like
leaves.

The children peered curiously at them as the cook arranged them on tiny
plates, not larger than the inside of Angel's little hand. She was in
the midst of doing this when the kitchen door opened, and a little girl
ran in. She was much younger than Angel, and she was dressed in a white
frock and blue sash. In her arms was a beautiful doll, more beautiful
than any doll Angel had ever seen except in a toy-shop window.

The little girl ran quickly into the kitchen; but when she saw the
children she looked shyly at them, and crept up to cook's side.

"Now, Miss Ellie," said cook, "are you come to look at your cakes?" and
she lifted the little girl upon a stool, that she might stand by and
watch what she was doing.

"Are all these for my birthday?" said the child.

"Yes, every one of them," said cook.

"Oh, what a great many! Aren't there a great many, cook?"

"Yes; but I suppose there's plenty of little folks to eat them," said
cook, laughing.

"Oh yes," said the child; "there's me, and Alice, and Fanny, and Jemmy;
and then there's Nellie Rogers and Joe Rogers, and little Eva; and
there's Charlie and Willie Campbell. And then there are all my dollies:
they must come to my birthday tea, mustn't they, cook?"

"Oh, of course," said cook; "it would never do to leave them out. Is
that a new one, Miss Ellie?"

"Yes; Uncle Harry gave her to me for a birthday present. Isn't she
nice? She has curls, cook!"

"Oh, she is a beauty!" said cook. "What's her name?"

"I don't know," said the child; "I can't think what would be the nicest
name. What would you call her if she was your dolly, cook?"

"Oh, Emma, or Sarah, or Jane, or something of that sort," said cook,
laughing.

"I don't think those are very pretty names," said the little girl; "I
would like her to have quite a new name, that I never heard before."

"Well, we must think about it," said cook. "I must go and take the
clothes out now, and let these children go."

"Who is that little girl, cook," whispered the child.

"She has brought the clothes from the mangle: her mother mangles them."

"What is her name, cook?" whispered Ellie again.

"I don't know, Miss Ellie; you'd better ask her," said cook.

"You ask her, please, cook," whispered the child again.

So cook turned to the children, and asked them what were their names.

"He's Tim, ma'am," said the little girl, pointing at the boy, standing
shyly with his finger in his mouth; "and I'm Angel."

"Oh, cook!" whispered little Ellie, "please, please let me see her
wings. Are they tucked up under her shawl? Oh, please do let me see
them!"

But the cook did nothing but laugh.

"However did you come by such an outlandish name?" she said, turning to
little Angel.

"Please, ma'am, it's Angel for short," said the child.

"And what is it for long?"

"It's Angelina, please, ma'am, for long. My mother read it in a penny
number before she was married; and Angelina lived in a palace, please,
ma'am, and had gold shoes and a carriage with six horses, my mother
said."

"Well, to be sure!" said cook. "And so she gave you that heathenish
name, when you haven't got gold shoes, nor a carriage, nor six horses.
Well, to be sure!"

"Oh, cook!" said little Ellie, "I think it's a beautiful name: the
angels live in heaven."

"She doesn't live there, poor little soul!" said cook compassionately;
"I'll be bound it's anything but heaven where she lives. Her father
drinks, and her mother has five of them."

"Cook," whispered the child again, "would she like one of my birthday
cakes?"

"I should think so," said cook. "Should we give her one?"

And, to Angel's great astonishment, she found herself the sole owner
and possessor of a pastry bird, a fish, a star, and a heart; while
little Tim was made equally rich.

The children were almost too pleased to say "Thank you!"

"There, now! The basket's ready," said cook; "and here's the money for
your mother."

Angel and Tim took up the basket, and turned to go.

"Good-bye, little Angel," said the child shyly; "I do wish you had some
wings."

"Cook, don't you think Angelina would be a pretty name for my dolly?"
they heard her saying as they went down the steps.

"Ay, it was nice in there!" said Tim, as they walked homewards in the
dirty, dismal, muddy streets. "I wish I had a birthday."

"Did you ever have one?" asked Angel; "I never did."

"Yes, one," said Tim; "only once, and that was a long, long time ago."

"What is a birthday?" said Angel.

"It's a nice sort of a day!" said Tim, "When everybody's good to you,
and gives you things. One day mother let me have a birthday."

"And what was it like?" said little Angel.

"Oh, the kitchen was swept all clean and tidy, and mother never scolded
me once all day, and she made a cake for tea that had lots of currants
in it—not just one in each slice, like the cake we have on Sundays. And
father gave me a penny and a packet of goodies for my very own! That's
the only birthday I ever had. Mother says she hasn't any time for
birthdays now."

"I wonder if I shall ever have a birthday," said little Angel with a
sigh, as she went in to turn the mangle once more.



CHAPTER II

WHO KNOCKS?

THE mangle went on, backwards and forwards, until very late that night.
Little Angel's arms and back ached terribly when the work was finished
and she and her mother crept close to the flickering fire.

"Now go to bed, Angel," said her mother.

"Oh, mother, please let me stop a little longer with you. Are you going
to sit up?"

"Yes, I must wait till he comes," said the mother wearily, glancing at
the large clock which was ticking solemnly in the corner of the little
kitchen. "Oh dear, oh dear! what a lot of trouble there is in the
world!"

"Mother," said little Angel suddenly, "did you ever have a birthday?"

Mrs. Blyth did not answer at first, but bent lower over the fire.
Little Angel fancied she was crying.

"Yes," she said at last, "when I was a little girl, and my father was
alive. I wish I was a little girl now."

"Was it so very nice having a birthday, mother?"

"It was very nice having a father," said Mrs. Blyth. "Ay, and he was a
good father too; he was a real good man, was your grandfather, Angel."

"What did you do on your birthday, mother?" asked the child.

"Oh, it was a real happy day. My mother made a plum-pudding for us, and
my father took us all to the park for a walk after tea. And then, he
used always to give me a present. I have one of them yet."

"Where is it, mother?" said little Angel; "do let me see it."

"Oh, it's up on that shelf," said her mother, pointing to some little
shelves at the top of the kitchen. "It's a shame to let it lie there
when I promised him to read it every day. But what can a woman do
that's got a drunken husband, five children, and a mangle?" she said,
more to herself than to the child.

"Please let me look at your birthday present, mother," said little
Angel again.

Mrs. Blyth stood upon one of the broken chairs, and took down from
the shelf an old and shabby book. The cover was half off, and it was
thickly coated with dust. One of the spiders had been busy in its
neighbourhood, and had fastened one end of a large cobweb to its cover.

She wiped it with her dirty apron, and handed it to the child; then she
sat down again, and bent over the fire.

"Here's writing at the beginning, mother," said Angel; "what does it
say?"

Mrs. Blyth took the book, and a tear fell on the soiled leaves of the
Bible as she opened it.

"Given to Emily Brownlow by her dear Father on her birthday, with the
hope that she will remember her promise."

"And what was the promise, mother!"

"That I would read it, child," said her mother shortly.

"But you never do read it, mother."

"No, it's a shame," said her mother; "I must begin."

"Read me just one little bit before I go to bed," said Angel, sitting
on the stool at her mother's feet.

Mrs. Blyth turned over the leaves, and in a mechanical way began to
read the first verse on which her eye fell.

"'Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear My voice, and
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with Me.'"

"Who is knocking, mother?" asked Angel.

"It means Jesus Christ, I think," said her mother. "'Behold, I stand at
the door and knock.' I expect it means Jesus. I learnt a hymn at the
Sunday school about it. I went to the Sunday school when my father was
alive. I remember it began—"

   "Behold a Stranger at the door,
    He gently knocks—has knocked before;"

"and then—I can't remember what came next—something about using no
other friend so ill."

"I never heard Him knock," said Angel; "does He come when I'm in bed at
night?"

"No," said her mother; "I don't think it's that door He knocks at. I
don't rightly know what it means."

"Read it again, please, mother."

So Mrs. Blyth read the text again.

"I hope He won't come in to-night," said little Angel, when she had
finished.

"Why not, child?" asked her mother.

"Because we've got nothing for supper to-night, only those crusts Billy
and Tommy left at tea. I'm afraid He wouldn't like those."

"Oh, it doesn't mean He's really coming to supper," said the mother; "I
wish I could remember what it does mean. But it's lots of years since I
read it. My father died when I was only ten, and nobody never took any
trouble with me afterwards."

Little Angel was very sleepy now, so her mother took her upstairs, and
put her into the bed with her little brothers and sisters, and then
she sat down on a chair beside her, and buried her face in her hands.
Recollections of a father's love and of a father's teaching were coming
into that poor, ignorant mind. Imperfect, childish recollections they
were, and yet quite distinct enough to make her sigh for what had been
and for what might have been.

And so she sat, this poor wife, as the clock ticked on and the children
slept. Then, after long hours of waiting, came a great noise at the
door, and she rose, trembling, to open it.

Little Angel started from her sleep, and, sitting up in bed, called
out, "Mother, He's come; I heard Him knock."

"Yes," said her mother, who was lighting the candle, "I'm going to let
him in."

"Oh, please let me go down and see Him."

"No, nonsense, child," said her mother; "your father's sure to be in
drink. I'll get him quickly to bed."

"Oh, dear!" said little Angel, in a disappointed voice, as she lay
down, "I thought it was Jesus knocking at the door!"



CHAPTER III

LITTLE ELLIE'S SISTER

THE next week there were more clothes to be taken home to Mrs.
Douglas's. It was not a heavy load this time, and little Angel went
alone. She was passing under one of the bow windows on her way to the
passage leading to the kitchen door, when she heard a loud tapping on
the pane. She looked up, and there was little Ellie nodding to her, and
kissing her hand, and holding up the new doll for her to see.

And when cook opened the kitchen door, and Angel came in with the
clothes, little Ellie was just coming in at the other door.

"Please, cook," said the child, "Mabel wants to see the little Angel."

"Bless us!" said cook, laughing. "I'd clean forgot about the child's
name. I couldn't think what angel it was at first. You take her, Miss
Ellie."

"Please, come," said the little girl; and she held out her tiny hand
for Angel to take.

Little Angel had never seen such a beautiful house. They went up a long
easy staircase, very different from the one Angel climbed at night when
she went to bed. They passed a splendid window, with pretty coloured
glass in it, which threw all sorts of lovely colours on the stairs. And
the carpet was so soft that Angel could not hear the sound of her own
feet.

At the top of the staircase was a long passage, with doors at both
sides of it. Ellie opened one of these, and led Angel into a pretty
little sitting-room. A bright fire was burning in the grate, and by the
side of the fire was a sofa. On this sofa Angel saw a young lady lying,
with a very sweet and gentle face. She looked very ill and tired, Angel
thought, and had such a kind face that she could not feel afraid of her.

"This is the little Angel, Mabel," said little Ellie, as she took her
by the hand to her sister's couch.

"Bring a stool for her to sit on, Ellie. I'm very glad to see you,
little Angel."

"Yes; but, Mabel, cook says she hasn't any wings, and she doesn't think
she lives in heaven. She says it's only her name."

"Yes," said her sister; "I understand. But some day, I hope she will
live in heaven. Do you think you will, little Angel?"

"I hope so, please, ma'am," said Angel.

"But, if you are ever to live in heaven with the Lord Jesus, you must
learn to love Him now," said the young lady.

"Is that the door He knocks at?" said Angel, starting from her seat, as
a sudden thought seized her.

"What do you mean, little Angel?"

"The door with the great pillars on each side of it, and the brass bell
and knocker; is it there He knocks every night?"

"I don't quite understand what you mean," said Mabel gently. "Can you
tell me a little more about it?"

"My mother read it in the Bible last night, and it said He knocked at a
door and wanted to come in, and mother said she didn't think it meant
our door."

"Is this what you mean?" said the young lady. She took up a little
Bible which lay beside her, and read aloud: "'Behold, I stand at the
door, and knock.'"

"Yes, that's it," said Angel; "and my mother said she had clean forgot
what it meant; but she thought it meant Jesus."

"Yes; your mother was quite right, little Angel; it is Jesus who is
knocking at the door."

"Then it is this door with the pillars," said the child.

"No, not this door," said the young lady; "it means a door that belongs
to you, little Angel. It is not a door that you can see or touch; it is
the door of little Angel's heart. Jesus calls it a door, to show you
what He means. He wants to come into your heart. He wants you to love
Him, and to give your own little self to Him. This is what it means,
little Angel."

The child looked as if she did not quite understand.

"Do you love your mother, little Angel?" asked the young lady.

"Oh yes, please, ma'am; very much."

"Then your mother is inside your heart. You love her with your heart,
don't you?"

"Oh yes, please, ma'am; she does everything for me, does mother."

"But Jesus loves you better than your mother does; and He has done a
great deal more for you than she has."

"Has He?" said little Angel simply.

"Yes, indeed He has. Do you know, He lived in heaven, where everything
is beautiful and happy, and He left His home there and came to live
down here. He lived a very sorrowful life. He was a poor man, little
Angel. He had no home of His own, but went about from place to place,
often very tired, and hungry, and faint. And people were very unkind
to Him; they laughed at Him and hated Him, and threw stones at Him,
and hunted Him from place to place; and at last, little Angel, He was
nailed on a cross of wood, and they put a crown of thorns on His head."

"Oh yes, please, ma'am; mother has a picture of that. Jesus is on
a cross, and some soldiers laughing at Him; it's in a book on the
drawers-top that my father bought at a sale."

"Yes," said the young lady; "that was how He died; oh, such a cruel,
painful death! And, little Angel, it was all for you!"

"All for me!" said the child.

"Yes, little Angel, all for you. For, if Jesus had not died, you could
never, never have gone to heaven. Shall I tell you why?"

"Yes, please, ma'am," said the child.

"You could never have gone to heaven, because no one can go there who
has done any wrong; only good and holy people can go there; all who
have done anything wrong must be punished for it. And, little Angel,
have you ever done anything wrong?"

"Yes," said little Angel, hanging down her head; "yes, please, ma'am, I
have."

"Then you could never go to heaven, for God must punish sin. But Jesus
is God, and He came and led that sorrowful life, and then died that
dreadful death, that He might be punished instead of you—instead of
you, little Angel. And now He says, 'I wonder if little Angel will love
Me for dying for her? I will knock at the door of her heart, and see if
she will let Me in, and love Me for what I have done for her, and be My
little child!'"

Angel opened her eyes very wide, and looked earnestly at the young lady
as she spoke.

"How old are you, little Angel?" she asked.

"Going on seven, ma'am," said Angel promptly.

"Then He has been waiting for you for years. Knocking—knocking, and you
have never let Him in!"

"That's a long time!" said Angel.

"Yes; and still He does not give up knocking. He is waiting still;
waiting for you to love Him; waiting for you to let Him in."

"He must be very tired," said Angel; "I wish I knew how to let Him in."

The young lady did not answer at once; she covered her face with her
hand for a minute, and was quite still.

Then she said, "Little Angel, I have been praying to Him to help me to
show you how to let Him into your heart. But I think, after all, the
best way will be for you to ask Him yourself. Will you ask Him now?"

"I don't know how," said Angel; "I don't know what to say."

"When you pray, little Angel, you should talk to Jesus just as you are
talking to me, and ask for just what you want. Kneel down by me, and I
will help you."

Little Ellie, who had been listening in silence all this time, knelt
down too, whilst her sister prayed.

"O Lord Jesus, show little Angel how to open the door of her heart to
Thee! Grant that she may let Thee in, and not keep Thee waiting any
longer. Oh, may she indeed be saved by Thee, and love Thee with all her
heart, for all that Thou hast done for her! Amen."

"And now, little Angel," said Mabel, when the children rose from their
knees, "when you get home you must ask Him yourself, and remember He
ever listens to every word that you say."



Angel had a great deal to think of as she walked home that morning with
her empty basket. She was very quiet all day as she was looking after
the children and turning the mangle—so quiet that her mother asked her
if she were ill. But Angel said, No, she was quite well, and turned the
mangle quietly again. But when the other children were in bed, and she
and her mother were alone, Angel said:

"Mother, do you know how old you are?"

"Dear me, let me see," said her mother. "I was just nineteen when I
got married to your father. I know I was just nineteen then, because I
remember my old aunt said, 'You're young enough, my lass, not twenty
yet. You'd better not be in a hurry.' Well, I was nineteen then, and,
let me see, I believe we've been married eight years next month.
Nineteen and eight, what's that? Count it on your fingers, Angel."

"Twenty-seven, mother," said little Angel, when she had carefully
counted it twice over. "Twenty-seven years old! Then Jesus has been
knocking at your door twenty-seven years! What a long time!"

"Oh, you're after that again, are you?" said her mother. "I wish I
could remember what it means."

"Miss Douglas told me," said Angel; and she repeated, as well as she
could, the conversation in the little sitting-room.

"Well, to be sure," said the mother, "it's very wonderful to think He
waits so long; I'm afraid I've been very bad to Him."

"Won't you let Him in to-night, mother?"

"Oh, child! I'm too busy," she said; "there's so much to do. There's
the children, and your father, and the mangle to look after, and always
dinner to cook, and things to clear away, and such lots of clothes to
wash, and your father's shirts to iron. I've no time to be good, Angel."

"But Miss Douglas said if you don't let Him into your heart and love
Him, you won't ever live with Him and the angels in heaven."

"Ah, well!" said the mother. "I suppose not; but there's lots of time
yet. When baby gets a bit older, and Tom goes to school, I shall have a
bit more time; and then, Angel, I can sit still a bit and think about
it."

"Only, perhaps, as He's been knocking twenty-seven years," said Angel,
"it's such a very long time, He may get tired of waiting, and walk
away."

"Oh no! I hope not," said her mother; and she got up and bustled about
the room, and sent Angel off to bed. She hoped the child would forget
about it before morning.

But when she went upstairs, after a few minutes, to see if Angel was in
bed, she found her kneeling in her nightgown before the window. There
was no light in the room, but the blind was up, and the moonlight was
streaming on the child's fair hair and clasped hands.

"She looks like one of the little angels in heaven," said the mother to
herself.

Angel had not heard her mother come upstairs, so Mrs. Blyth stood
quietly on the last step, and listened to Angel's little prayer.

"Oh, Jesus, please come in to-night! Oh it was very bad to keep You
outside when You did all that for me! Oh, Jesus, please don't knock any
longer, but just walk into my heart, and please never go away again?
Amen."

And then Angel crept into bed, and her mother wiped her eyes, and came
in and kissed her.



CHAPTER IV

THE LOUD KNOCK IN PLEASANT PLACE

"MOTHER! mother!" said little Angel, in the middle of the night,
creeping over to the bed where her father and mother were asleep.
"Mother, mother, there's a loud knock at our door!"

"Bless you, child," said the mother, "you're dreaming. Your father's
been in long since. Go to bed again."

"No, mother, listen; there it is again."

This time Mrs. Blyth heard it, and even Mr. Blyth opened his eyes, and
said, "What's that?"

Some one was knocking at the door as loudly as he could. Mrs. Blyth put
on some clothes, lighted a candle, and went down stairs to see what it
was.

When she came back her face was very white indeed. "Oh, Angel," she
said, "it's Tim; his mother's dead! She went to bed quite well, and
then Mr. Carter woke and heard her groaning, and she was dead in two
minutes—before he could call anybody."

"Oh, mother," said little Angel, trembling, "how dreadful! She was
washing all day yesterday, and I saw her put the shutters up just
before I came to bed."

"Yes," said Mrs. Blyth; "I'm sure it's made me feel quite sick. I must
go over and help them a bit, poor things."

Angel could not sleep any more that night. She lay awake thinking of
poor Tim, who had no mother, and wondering if Mrs. Carter were in
heaven with the angels. When her mother came back it was time to get
up. Mrs. Blyth had been crying very much, and she went about her work
almost without uttering a word.

But when she and Angel were turning the mangle, she said—

"Angel, do you remember what you said when you waked me last night?
You said, 'Mother, there's a loud knock at our door.' I've never got
those words out of my head since. All the time I was laying out poor
Mrs. Carter I heard you, saying, 'There's a loud knock at our door,
mother.' And when Mr. Carter told the doctor how well she had been all
yesterday, and the doctor said, 'Yes, it's very sudden, very sudden
indeed,' I heard you saying again, 'There's a loud knock at our door,
mother.' And now, even when I'm turning the mangle, it seems to be
saying those same words over and over again."

"Yes," she said, after a minute or two, "it's of no use me saying, 'I'm
too busy, I can't let Him in just yet.' Death won't take that excuse
when he knocks at the door."

That was a very dull day. Angel peeped out of the window, and saw the
closed house opposite, and the darkened room upstairs where poor Mrs.
Carter was lying. And then the man came to measure her for her coffin,
and then Mr. Carter and his poor little motherless children came into
Mrs. Blyth's house to get their dinner, and Mr. Carter cried all the
time, and would hardly eat anything.

It was a very dismal day.

But after tea, as Angel was washing up the tea things, and her mother
was folding the clothes for the mangle, an unusual sound was heard in
the narrow court where they lived. It was the sound of singing—several
voices singing.

In a moment, all in Pleasant Place had opened their doors or their
windows and were looking out. They saw a young man standing in the
middle of the court, and a little knot of people round him, with open
books in their hands.

"What is it, mother?" asked little Angel, as Mrs. Blyth came into the
room.

"That's young Mr. Douglas, Miss Douglas's brother," said her mother,
in a whisper. "I've often seen him there when I've been to take the
clothes home; he's one of the ministers here."

"Why, mother," said the child, as she listened to the singing, "they
are singing your hymn—the hymn you learnt in the Sunday School."

"No," said her mother, "it isn't my hymn, but it's very like it."

   "Knocking, knocking! Who is there?
    Waiting, waiting, oh, how fair!
    'Tis a Pilgrim, strange and kingly,
    Never such was seen before;
    Oh! My soul, for such a wonder,
    Wilt thou not undo the door?"

"Eighteen doors in this court," said the young minister, looking round
on the people, who were all peeping out at him. "Eighteen doors, and
every one of them open!"

"Listen to-night to the story of a door—a closed door!"

"Here is a closed door, and some one standing outside it. He knocks at
the door; He calls out to the one inside; then He waits, He listens.
There is no sound within; no one comes to open the door."

"He knocks again; He calls again; He listens again. No one comes."

"Will He walk again? No, He waits still; He knocks once more; He calls
again; He listens again. No answer."

"Surely the door must be bolted and barred so fast inside that it
cannot be opened, or perhaps the owner of the house is out, or asleep,
or deaf, and does not hear the knocking."

"But look a little longer. Some more people come up to the door and
knock, and as soon as ever they knock they are admitted. They are let
in, and the door is shut in the face of Him who has waited so long."

"Many times in the day that door is opened to all kinds of people; but
it is always closed in the face of the One who still stands outside."

"Does He weary of standing there? No; night comes, but He goes on
knocking, goes on calling, goes on listening for any answer from
within."

"Who is He? Is He a beggar come to ask for money?"

"No, He is no beggar; for if you look you will see that His hands are
full of presents for the one inside the house."

"Is He a rent collector come to demand that which is due to Him? No;
for although the house really belongs to Him, He demands nothing, He
only pleads for an entrance."

"Is He an enemy to the one inside? No; He is, on the contrary, his best
friend, the One to whom he owes everything."

"What a strange thing that He is kept outside!"

"Is it a strange thing?" said the minister, looking earnestly at all
the people. "Is it a strange thing? Then get up at once and let Him in,
for it is at your door He is knocking."

"My door!" you say. "My door! What do you mean? No one is knocking at
my door."

"No one? Oh, my friends! Did you hear no knock this morning at your
door—your heart's door. When the neighbours came in and told you that
one in that house, whom you had seen well and strong a few hours
before, was now in eternity—oh, my friends! Was it not a knock?"

"Did not the Lord Jesus, your best Friend, knock then? Did He not call
as well as knock? Did you not hear Him saying, 'Are you ready to die?
Oh, let Me in before it is too late!'"

"That was a very loud knock, my friends; but it is not the only time
He has knocked. Day after day, week after week, year after year, ever
since you were little children, He has been knocking and waiting, and
knocking and waiting for you to let Him in. That night when you were so
ill, and the doctor told you that you might never get better, was He
not knocking then?"

"And when your child died, and you stood by its open grave, was He not
knocking then?"

"And these are only the great, startling knocks; there are many others
which you do not hear—there is too much noise and bustle inside the
house for their sound to reach you. Yet never a day passes that He does
not knock in some way or other."

"But oh! Take care, for the day is coming—who can say how soon? When
there will be a last knock, a last call; and then He will turn and walk
away from the door, never to return."

"Oh, my friends! Why do you keep Him waiting outside? You let all
others in. Your pleasures, your companions, your work,—all these knock
at the door, and are let in at once. But you have no room for Christ."

"But oh! Remember, if there is no room for Christ in your heart, there
will be no room for you in Christ's heaven."

"My friend, He is knocking now; it may be His last knock. He is calling
now; it may be His last call."

"'Oh, let Me in.'" He cries, "'and I will make you happy; I am bringing
you forgiveness, and peace, and joy, and rest, and all that you need.
Oh, let Me in before it is too late! I have waited so patiently and so
long, and still I wait. Will you not, even this night, undo the door?'"

When the little service was over the people went back into their
houses, and Angel and her mother went on with their work. And as Angel
wiped the cups and saucers, she sang softly to herself the chorus of
the hymn—

     "Oh! My soul, for such a wonder,
      Wilt thou not undo the door?"

"Yes, I will!" said her mother suddenly, bursting into tears; "I will
undo the door; I will keep Him waiting no longer."



CHAPTER V

ANGEL'S BIRTHDAY

IT was a bright, sunny morning, some weeks after that little service
was held in Pleasant Place.

The sunbeams were streaming in at Mrs. Blyth's window, for the cobwebs
and spiders had some time ago received notice to quit, and the dust had
all been cleared away, and found no chance of returning.

Mrs. Blyth was a different woman. Her troubles and trials remained, and
she had just as much to do, and just as many children to look after,
but she herself was quite different. She had opened the door of her
heart, and the Lord Jesus had come in. And He had brought sunshine with
Him into that dark and ignorant heart. Life, instead of being a burden
and a weariness, was now full of interest to Mrs. Blyth, because she
was trying to do every little thing to please Jesus, who had done so
much for her. Whether she was washing the children, or cleaning the
house, or turning the mangle, she tried to do it all to please Him. She
remembered that He was looking at her, and that He would be pleased if
she did it well. It was wonderful how that thought helped her, and how
it made the work easy and pleasant.

So, through the bright, clean window, the morning sunbeams were
streaming on little Angel's head. Her mother was standing by her side,
watching her as she lay asleep, and waiting for her to awake.

As soon as ever Angel opened her eyes, her mother said—

"Little Angel, do you know what to-day is?"

"No, mother," said Angel, rubbing her eyes, and sitting up in bed.

"It's your birthday, Angel; it is indeed!" said her mother. "I hunted
it out in your grandmother's old Bible. It's the day you were born,
just seven years ago!"

"And am I really going to have a birthday, mother?" said Angel, in a
very astonished voice.

"Yes, a real good birthday," said her mother; "so get up and come
downstairs, before any of it is gone."

Angel was not long in putting on her clothes and coming down. She found
the table put quite ready for breakfast, with a clean tablecloth, and
the mugs and plates set in order for her and her little brothers and
sisters; and in a little jar in the middle of the table was a beautiful
bunch of flowers. Real country flowers they were, evidently gathered
from some pleasant cottage garden far away. There were stocks and
mignonette, and southernwood, and sweetbrier, and a number of other
flowers, the names of which neither Angel nor her mother knew.

"Oh mother, mother," said little Angel, "what a beautiful nosegay!"

"It's for you, Angel," said her mother: "for your birthday. I got it at
the early market. My father always gave me a posy on my birthday."

"Oh, mother," said little Angel, "is it really for me?"

But that was not all, for by the side of Angel's plate she found a
parcel. It was tied up in brown paper, and there was a thick piece of
string round it, fastened tightly in so many knots that it took Angel a
long time to open it. Her little hands quite shook with excitement when
at last she took off the cover and looked inside. It was a little book,
in a plain black binding.

"Oh, mother," said Angel, "what is it? Is it for my birthday?"

"Yes," said her mother; "look at the writing at the beginning. I'll
read it to you."

It was very uneven writing, and very much blotted, for Mrs. Blyth was
only a poor scholar; but little Angel did not notice this—it seemed
very wonderful to her to be able to write at all.

Now, what was written in the little book was this:

"Given to little Angel by her dear mother; and she hopes she will
promise to read it, and will keep her promise better than I did."

"But I can't read, mother," said Angel.

"No; but you must learn," said her mother. "I mean that you shall go to
school regular now, Angel. Why, you're seven years old to-day!"

Poor little Angel's head was nearly turned; it was such a wonderful
thing to have a birthday.

But the wonders of the day were not over yet; for when, after
breakfast, Angel asked for the clothes to mangle, her mother said:
"They're all done Angel; I'm just going to take them home. I've done a
lot these three nights when you was in bed, that we might have a bit of
a holiday to-day."

"A holiday, mother!" said Angel. "Oh, how nice! No mangling all day!"

"No mangling all day," repeated the mother, as if the thought were as
pleasant to her as to Angel.

But the wonders of the day were not yet over.

"Angel," said her mother, as they were washing the children, "did you
ever see the sea?"

"No, mother," said Angel; "but Tim has; he went last Easter Monday with
his uncle."

"Well," said her mother, "if it doesn't rain, you shall see it to-day."

"Oh, mother!" was all that little Angel could say. And who do you think
is going to take you, child? "I don't know, mother."

"Why, Angel, your father is. He came in last night as soon as you'd
gone to bed. He sat down in that arm-chair by the fire, and he said,
'Dear me! how comfortable things is just now at home! If they was
always like this, I wouldn't stop out of an evening.'"

"So I said, 'If God helps me, John, they always shall be like this,
and a deal better, too, when the children gets a bit bigger.' And your
father stopped at home and read his newspaper, Angel, and then we
had a bit of supper together. It was like when we was first married,
child; and as we ate our supper, Angel, I said, 'It's Angel's birthday
to-morrow, John.' And your father said, 'Is it? Why, to-morrow's
Saturday. Let's all go to the sea together;' and he took quite a
handful of shillings out of his pocket. 'Here's enough to pay,'
he said. 'Have them all ready at dinner-time, and we'll go by the
one-o'clock train.'"

"Oh, mother," said little Angel, "it is so nice to have a birthday!"

True to his promise, John Blyth came home at dinner-time, with the
shillings still in his pocket. His mates had tried hard to persuade him
to turn into the Blue Dragon on his way home, but he told them he had
an engagement, and had no time to stay.

What a happy afternoon that was!

Angel had never been in a train before, and her father took her on his
knee, pointing out to her the houses, and trees, and fields, and sheep,
and cows, and horses, as they went by. And then they arrived at the
sea, and oh! What a great, wonderful sea it seemed to Angel! She and
her little brothers and sisters made houses in the sand, and took off
their shoes and stockings and waded in the water, and picked up quite
a basketful of all kinds of beautiful shells; whilst her father and
mother sat, with the baby, under the shadow of the cliffs and watched
them.

And then they all came home together to tea, and her father never went
out again that night, but sat with them by the fire, and told Angel
stories till it was time to go to bed.

"Oh, mother," said Angel again, a sleepy head on the pillow, "it is
nice to have a birthday!"



CHAPTER VI

THE GREAT BIRTHDAY

THE bells were ringing merrily from the tower of the old church close
to Pleasant Place.

The street near the church was full of people bustling to and fro,
going in and out of the different shops, and hurrying along as if
none of them had any time to lose. The shops were unusually gay and
tempting, for it was Christmas Eve. Even Pleasant Place looked a
little less dull than usual. There were sprigs of holly in some of the
windows, and most of the houses were a little cleaner and brighter than
usual.

Angel and her mother had been very busy all day. They had just finished
their mangling, and had put all the clothes out of the way for
Christmas Day, when they heard a knock at the door, and Angel went to
open it.

"It's a basket, mother," she said. "It can't be for us."

The man who had brought the basket laughed.

"It's for an Angel!" he said. "Have you got any of that article in
here? Here's the direction I was to bring it to—'Little Angel, No. 9,
Pleasant Place.'"

"Then, please, it's for me," said Angel.

"For you!" said the man. "Well, to be sure! So you are the angel, are
you? All right, here's your basket!" And he was gone before they could
ask more.

The basket was opened with some difficulty, for it was tightly tied up,
and then Angel and her mother put out the contents on the table amidst
many exclamations.

There was first a plum-pudding, then a number of oranges and apples,
then a large cake, and then a pretty Christmas card, with a picture of
a robin hopping about in the snow, and these words printed on it, "A
Happy Christmas to you all."

"Where can they all have come from?" said little Angel, as one good
thing after another came out of the basket. At the very bottom of the
basket they found a tiny note.

"This will tell us about it," said Mrs. Blyth. "Why, it's directed to
you, Angel!"

So Angel's mother sat down, stirred the fire, spelt it carefully out,
and read it aloud by the firelight.

     "MY DEAR LITTLE ANGEL,"
          "I send you a few little things for Christmas
      Day. I hope you will have a very happy day. Do not
      forget whose Birthday it is. Your friend,"
                                      "MABEL DOUGLAS."

"Whose birthday is it, mother?" asked little Angel.

"The Lord Jesus Christ's," said her mother reverently. "Did I never
tell you that, little Angel? It's the day we think about Him being born
a little baby at Bethlehem."

[Illustration: "SO YOU ARE THE ANGEL, ARE YOU? HERE'S YOUR BASKET."]

Angel was sitting on her stool in front of the fire thinking, and it
was some time before she spoke again. Then she said suddenly, "What are
you going to give Him, mother?"

"Give who, Angel?"

"What are you going to give the Lord Jesus for His birthday?"

"Oh, I don't know," said her mother. "I don't see how we can give Him
anything."

"No," said little Angel sadly; "I've only got one penny,—that wouldn't
buy anything good enough. I would have liked to give Him something on
His birthday; He did such a lot for us."

"We can try to please Him, Angel," said her mother, "and do everything
that we think He would like."

"Yes," said little Angel, "we must try all day long."

That was a very happy Christmas Day for Angel and for her mother.

"This is the Lord Jesus' birthday," was Angel's first thought when she
awoke in the morning; and all through the day she was asking herself
this question, "What would Jesus like?" And whatever she thought He
would like that she tried to do.

Angel's father was at home to dinner, and was very kind to her all day.
He had not been seen inside a public-house since Angel's birthday. It
was a very good little Christmas dinner. As they were eating it, Mr.
Blyth said:

"Emily, have you seen those bills on the wall at the top of the court?"

Angel's mother said, "No; I have not been out to-day."

"There's to be a meeting to-night in that little schoolroom just a bit
of way down the street. That new young minister's going to speak; and
it says on the bills it will all be over in half an hour. I've a good
mind to go and hear what he's got to say. Will you come with me?"

"Yes, that I will," said Mrs. Blyth, with tears in her eyes. She had
not been inside a place of worship with her husband since the first
year they were married.

"Can't Angel come too?" said her father, as he looked at her earnest
little face.

"Not very well," said Mrs. Blyth; "we can't all go. Some one must stop
with baby and the children."

When Angel's large plum-pudding was put on the table, a sudden thought
seized her. "Mother," she whispered, "don't you think Jesus would like
poor old Mrs. Sawyer to have a bit of it?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Blyth, "I'll cut her a slice, and one for Annie too,
poor girl. Will you take them in?"

So Angel went next door with her two slices of plum-pudding. She found
Mrs. Sawyer and her niece Annie just beginning their dinner. There
was nothing on the table but some tea, and a loaf of bread with a few
currants in it, so Angel felt very glad she had brought the pudding.
She was sure Jesus would be pleased they should have it; and she
thought it would make Him glad on His birthday to see how Mrs. Sawyer
and Annie smiled when they saw what she had brought them.

"Are you going to this meeting to-night?" said Annie, as Angel turned
to go.

"No, I'm not going," said Angel; "but father and mother are. I must
mind the children."

"I'll tell you what," said Annie; "if you'll bring them in here, I'll
mind them. I can't leave aunt, and they'll be a bit of company for her."

And so it came to pass that Pleasant Place beheld the wonderful sight
of Mr. and Mrs. Blyth and Angel all going together to the little
meeting in the schoolroom.

A good many Pleasant Place people were there; and they looked round in
astonishment as Mr. Blyth came in, for they thought him about the most
unlikely man in the whole court to be there. And his wife and little
Angel, as they sat beside him, prayed very earnestly that he might get
a blessing.

Mr. Douglas's text was a very strange one for Christmas Day—at least,
so many of the people thought when he gave it out. It had only four
words, so that even little Angel could remember it quite well—

     "GIVE ME THINE HEART."

"Suppose," said the minister, "it was my birthday, and every one in
my house was keeping it. They all had a holiday and went out into the
country, and there was a very good dinner, which they all very much
enjoyed, and altogether it was a very pleasant day to them indeed."

"But suppose that I, whose birthday it was, was quite left out of
it. No one gave me a single present; no one even spoke to me; no one
took the slightest notice of me. In fact, all day long I was quite
forgotten; I never once came into their thoughts."

"Nay, more. Not only did they do nothing whatever to give me pleasure,
but they seemed all day long to take a delight in doing the very things
which they knew grieved me and pained me, and were distressing to me."

"Surely, my friends, that would be a strange way of keeping my
birthday; surely I should feel very hurt by such conduct; surely it
would be a perfect sham to pretend to be keeping my birthday, and yet
not take the slightest notice of me, except to annoy and wound me! My
friends," said the minister, "this afternoon I took a walk. In the
course of my walk I saw a number of people who pretended to be keeping
a birthday. And yet what were a great many of them doing? They were
eating and drinking and enjoying themselves, and having a merry time of
it."

"But I noticed that the One whose birthday it was, was quite forgotten:
they had not given Him one single present all day long they had never
once spoken to Him; all day long He had never been in their thoughts;
all day long He had been completely and entirely passed by and
forgotten."

"Nor was this all. I saw some who seemed to be taking a pleasure in
doing the very things He does not like, the very things which offend
and grieve Him—drinking and quarrelling, and taking His holy name in
vain."

"And yet all these, my friends, pretended to be keeping the Lord Jesus
Christ's birthday!"

"But, I trust, by seeing you here to-night, that you have not been
amongst their number. I would therefore only put to you this one
question—"

"The Lord Jesus Christ's birthday! Have you made Him a present to-day?"

"A present!" you say. "What can I give Him? He is the King of kings and
Lord of lords. What have I that is fit for a present to a king?"

"Give Him what He asks for, my friends. He says to you to-night, 'Give
Me thine heart.'"

"That is the birthday present He is looking for. Will you hold it back?"

"Oh, think of what we are commemorating to-day. Think how He left His
glory, and came to be a poor, helpless babe for you; think, my friends,
of all His wonderful love to you. And then I would ask you, Can you
refuse Him what He asks? Can you say—"

"Lord, I cannot give Thee my heart. I will give it to the world, to
pleasure, to sin, to Satan, but not to Thee,—no, not to Thee. I have no
birthday present for Thee to-night?"

"Oh, will you not rather say—"

   "'Lord, here is my heart; I bring it to Thee; take it for Thine own.
     Cleanse it in Thy blood; make it fit to be Thine'"?

"Will you not this night lay at your King's feet the only birthday
present you can give Him—the only one He asks for—your heart?"

"Mother," said little Angel, as they walked home, "we can give Him a
present, after all."

It was her father who answered her.

"Yes, Angel," he said, in a husky voice; "and we mustn't let Christmas
Day pass before we have done it."

And that night amongst the angels in heaven there was joy—joy over one
sinner who repented of the evil of his way, and laid at his Lord's feet
a birthday present, even his heart.

There was joy amongst the angels in heaven; and a little Angel on earth
shared in their joy.



[Illustration: "PLEASE, MR. SOLEMN, WHEN YOU DIE,
 WHO'LL HAVE TO DIG YOUR GRAVE?"]

                             LITTLE DOT

CHAPTER I

OLD SOLOMON'S VISITOR

IT was a bright morning in spring, and the cemetery on the outskirts
of the town looked more peaceful, if possible, than it usually did.
The dew was still on the grass, for it was not yet nine o'clock. The
violets and snowdrops on little children's graves were peeping above
the soil, and speaking of the resurrection. The robins were singing
their sweetest songs on the top of mossy gravestones—happy in the
stillness of the place. And the sunbeams were busy everywhere, sunning
the flowers, lighting up the dewdrops, and making everything glad and
pleasant. Some of them even found their way into the deep grave in
which Solomon Whitaker, the old grave-digger, was working, and they
made it a little less dismal, and not quite so dark.

Not that old Whitaker thought it either dismal or dark. He had been a
grave-digger nearly all his life, so he looked upon grave-digging as
his vocation, and thought it, on the whole, more pleasant employment
than that of most of his neighbours.

It was very quiet in the cemetery at all times, but especially in the
early morning; and the old man was not a little startled by hearing a
very small voice speaking to him from the top of the grave.

"What are you doing down there, old man?" said the little voice.

The grave-digger looked up quickly, and there, far above him, and
peeping cautiously into the grave, was a child in a clean white
pinafore, and with a quantity of dark brown hair hanging over her
shoulders.

"Whoever in the world are you?" was his first question.

His voice sounded very awful, coming as it did out of the deep grave,
and the child ran away, and disappeared as suddenly as she had come.

Solomon looked up several times afterwards as he threw up fresh
spadefuls of earth, but for some time he saw no more of his little
visitor. But she was not far away; she was hiding behind a high
tombstone, and in a few minutes she took courage, and went again to
the top of the grave. This time she did not speak, but stood with her
finger in her mouth, looking shyly down upon him, as her long brown
hair blew wildly about in the breeze.

Solomon thought he had never seen such a pretty little thing. He had
had a little girl once, and though she had been dead more than thirty
years, he had not quite forgotten her.

"What do they call you, my little dear?" said he, as gently as his
husky old voice would let him say it.

"Dot," said the child, nodding her head at him from the top of the
grave.

"That's a very funny name," said Solomon. "I can't think on that I ever
heard it afore."

"Dot isn't my real name; they call me Ruth in my father's big Bible on
our parlour table."

"That's got nothing to do with Dot as I can see," said the grave-digger
musingly.

"No," she said, shaking her long brown hair out of her eyes; "it's
'cause I'm such a little dot of a thing that they call me Dot."

"Oh, that's it, is it?" said Solomon; and then he went into a deep
meditation on names, and called to mind some strange ones which he read
on the old churchyard gravestones.

When Solomon was in one of his "reverdies," as his old wife used to
call them when she was alive, he seldom took much notice of what was
going on around him, and he had almost forgotten the little girl, when
she said suddenly, in a half-frightened voice—

"I wonder what they call you, old man?"

"Solomon," said the grave-digger; "Mr. Solomon Whitaker—that's my name."

"Then, please, Mr. Solemn, what are you doing down there?"

"I'm digging a grave," said Solomon.

"What's it for, please, Mr. Solemn?" asked the child.

"Why, to bury folks in, of course," said the old man.

Little Dot retreated several steps when she heard this, as if she were
afraid Mr. Solomon might want to bury her. When he looked up again
there was only a corner of her white pinafore in sight. But as he went
on quietly with his work, and took no notice of her, Dot thought she
might venture near again, for she wanted to ask Mr. Solomon another
question.

"Please," she began, "who are you going to put in that there hole?"

"It's a man as fell down dead last week. He was a hard-working fellow,
that he was," said the grave-digger; for he always liked to give people
a good word when digging their graves.

Dot now seemed satisfied; and, on her side, told the old man that she
had come to live in one of the small cottages near the cemetery gates,
and that they used to be "ever so far off" in the country.

Then she ran away to another part of the cemetery, and old Solomon
shaded his eyes with his hand to watch her out of sight.



CHAPTER II

DOT'S DAISIES

DOT'S mother had lived all her life in a remote part of Yorkshire, far
away from church or chapel or any kind of school. But her husband had
been born and brought up in a town, and country life did not suit him.
And so, when Dot was about five years old, he returned to his native
place, and took one of the cottages close to the cemetery, in order
that his little girl might still have some green grass on which to run
about, and might still see a few spring flowers.

The cemetery was some way out of the town; and Dot's mother, having had
but little education herself, did not think it at all necessary that
Dot, at her tender age, should go to school, and therefore the little
girl was allowed to spend most of her time in the cemetery, with which
she was very well pleased. She liked to run round the gravestones, and
climb over the grassy mounds, and watch the robins hopping from tree to
tree.

But Dot's favourite place was by old Solomon's side. She went about
with him from one part of the cemetery to another, and he liked to feel
her tiny hand in his. She took a great interest, too, in the graves
he was digging. She watched him shaping them neatly and making them
tidy, as he called it, until she began, as she fancied, to understand
grave-digging nearly as well as he did. But she sometimes puzzled the
old man by her questions, for Dot always wanted to know everything
about what she saw.

"Mr. Solemn," she said one day, "shall you make me a little grave when
I die?"

"Yes," he said, "I suppose I shall, little woman."

Dot thought this over for a long time.

"I don't want to go into a grave," she said; "it doesn't look nice."

"No," said the grave-digger, "you needn't be frightened; you won't have
to go just yet. Why, you're ever such a little mite of a thing!"

"Please, Mr. Solemn, when you die, who'll have to dig your grave,
please?"

"I don't know," said Solomon uneasily; "they'll have to get a new
digger, I suppose."

"Maybe you'd better dig one ready when you've a bit of time, Mr.
Solemn."

But though Solomon was very fond of digging other people's graves—for
he was so much used to it that it had become quite a pleasure to him—he
had no wish to dig his own, nor did he like thinking about it, though
Dot seemed as if she would not let him forget it.

Another day, when he was working in a distant part of the cemetery, she
asked him—

"Whereabouts will they bury you, Mr. Solemn?"

And when they were standing over a newly made grave, and Solomon was
admiring his work, she said—

"I hope they will make your grave neat, Mr. Solemn."

But though these questions and remarks made old Whitaker very
uneasy—for he had a sort of uncomfortable feeling in his heart when he
thought of the day when his grave-digging would come to an end—still,
for all that, he liked little Dot, and he would have missed the child
much if anything had kept her from his side. She took such an interest
in his graves, too, and watched them growing deeper and deeper with as
much pleasure as he did himself. And, whether we be rich or poor, high
or low, interest in our work generally wins our hearts. And by and by
Dot found herself a way, as she thought, of helping old Solomon to make
his graves look nice.

He was working one day at the bottom of a grave, and Dot was sitting on
the grass at a little distance. He thought she was busy with her doll,
for she had not been talking to him for a long time, and he gave a jump
as he suddenly felt something patting on his head, and heard Dot's
merry little laugh at the top of the grave. She had filled her pinafore
with daisies, and thrown them upon him in the deep grave.

"Whatever in the world is that for?" said the old man, good-naturedly,
as he shook the flowers off his head.

"It's to make it pretty," said Dot. "It'll make it white and soft, you
know, Mr. Solemn."

Solomon submitted very patiently; and from that time the child always
gathered daisies to scatter at the bottom of Solomon's graves, till
he began to look upon it as a necessary finish to his work. He often
thought Dot was like a daisy herself, so fresh and bright she was. He
wondered at himself when he reckoned how much he loved her. For his own
little girl had been dead so many years; and it was so long now since
he had dug his old wife's grave, that Solomon had almost forgotten how
to love. He had had no one since to care for him, and he had cared for
no one.

But little Dot had crept into his old heart unawares.



CHAPTER III

THE LITTLE GRAVE

OLD Solomon was digging a grave one day in a very quiet corner of the
cemetery. Dot was with him, as usual, prattling away in her pretty
childish way.

"It's a tidy grave, is this," remarked the old man, as he smoothed the
sides with his spade; "nice and dry too; it'll do me credit."

"It's a very little one," said Dot.

"Yes, it's like to be little when it's for a little girl; you wouldn't
want a very big grave, Dot."

"No," said Dot; "but you would want a good big one, wouldn't you, Mr.
Solemn?"

The mention of his own grave always made Solomon go into one of his
"reverdies." But he was recalled by Dot's asking quickly—

"Mr. Solemn, is she a very little girl?"

"Yes," said the old man; "maybe about your size, Dot. Her pa came about
the grave. I was in the office when he called, 'and,' said he, 'I want
a nice quiet little corner, for it is for my little girl.'"

"Did he look sorry?" said Dot.

"Yes," he said; "folks mostly do look sorry when they come about
graves."

Dot had never watched the digging of a grave with so much interest as
she did that of this little girl. She never left Solomon's side, not
even to play with her doll. She was very quiet, too, as she stood with
her large eyes wide open, watching all his movements. He wondered what
had come over her, and he looked up several times rather anxiously as
he threw up the spadefuls of earth.

"Mr. Solemn," she said, when he had finished, "when will they put the
little girl in?"

"To-morrow morning," said the old man, "somewhere about eleven."

Dot nodded her head, and made up her mind she would be in this corner
of the cemetery at eleven o'clock.

When Solomon came back from his dinner, and went to take a last look at
the little grave, he found the bottom of it covered with white daisies
which Dot had thrown in.

"She has made it pretty, bless her!" he murmured.

Dot crept behind the bushes near the chapel the next day, to watch the
little girl's funeral arrive. She saw the small coffin taken from the
hearse, and carried on in front. Then she watched the people get out
of the carriages, and a lady and gentleman, whom she felt sure were
the little girl's father and mother, walked on first. The lady had her
handkerchief to her eyes, and Dot could see that she was crying. After
her walked two little girls, and they were crying also.

There were a few other people at the funeral, but Dot did not care
to look at them; she wanted to see what became of the little girl's
coffin, which had just been carried into the chapel. She waited
patiently till they brought it out, and then she followed the mournful
procession at a little distance, till they reached the corner of the
cemetery where Solomon had dug the grave.

Solomon was there, standing by the grave, when the bearers came up
with the coffin. Dot could see him quite well, and she could see the
minister standing at the end of the grave, and all the people in a
circle round it. She did not like to go very near, but she could hear
the minister reading something in a very solemn voice, and then the
coffin was let down into the grave. The little girl's mamma cried very
much, and Dot cried too, she felt so sorry for her.

When the service was over, they all looked into the grave, and then
they walked away. Dot ran up as soon as they were gone, and, taking
hold of Solomon's hand, she peeped into the grave. The little coffin
was at the bottom, and some of Dot's daisies were lying round it.

"Is the little girl inside there?" said Dot in an awestruck voice.

"Yes," said Solomon, "she's in there, poor thing. I'll have to fill it
up now."

"Isn't it very dark?" said Dot.

"Isn't what dark?"

"In there," said Dot. "Isn't it very dark and cold for the poor little
girl?"

"Oh, I don't know that," said Solomon. "I don't suppose folks feels
cold when they are dead; anyhow, we must cover her up warm."

But poor Dot's heart was very full; and, sitting on the grass beside
the little girl's grave, she began to cry and sob as if her heart would
break.

"Don't cry, Dot," said the old man; "maybe the little girl knows
nothing about it—maybe she's asleep like."

But Dot's tears only flowed the faster. For she felt sure if the little
girl were asleep, and knew nothing about it, as old Solomon said, she
would be waking up some day, and then how dreadful it would be for her.

"Come, Dot," said Solomon at last, "I must fill it up."

Then Dot jumped up hastily. "Please, Mr. Solemn, wait one minute," she
cried, as she disappeared amongst the bushes.

"Whatever is she up to now?" said the old grave-digger.

She soon came back with her pinafore full of daisies. She had been
gathering them all the morning, and had hid them in a shady place under
the trees. Then, with a little sob, she threw them into the deep grave,
and watched them fall on the little coffin. After this she watched
Solomon finish his work, and did not go home till the little girl's
grave was made, as old Solomon said, "all right and comfortable."



CHAPTER IV

LILIAN AND HER WORDS

DOT took a very great interest in "her little girl's grave," as she
called it. She was up early the next morning; and as soon as her mother
had washed her, and given her her breakfast, she ran to the quiet
corner in the cemetery to look at the new-made grave. It looked very
bare, Dot thought, and she ran away to gather a number of daisies to
spread upon the top of it. She covered it as well as she could with
them, and she patted the sides of the grave with her little hands, to
make it more smooth and tidy. Dot wondered if the little girl knew
what she was doing, and if it made her any happier to know there were
daisies above her.

She thought she would ask Solomon; so when she had finished she went in
search of him. He was not far away, and she begged him to come and look
at what she had done to her little girl's grave. He took hold of Dot's
hand, and she led him to the place.

"See, Mr. Solemn," she said, "haven't I made my little girl pretty?"

"Aye," he answered; "you have found a many daisies, Dot."

"But, Mr. Solemn," asked Dot anxiously, "do you think she knows?"

"Why, Dot, I don't know—maybe she does," he said, for he did not like
to disappoint her.

"Mr. Solemn, shall I put you some daisies at the top of your grave?"
said Dot, as they walked away.

Solomon made no answer. Dot had reminded him so often of his own grave,
that he had sometimes begun to think about it, and to wonder how long
it would be before it would have to be made. He had a vague idea that
when he was buried, he would not come to an end.

He had heard of heaven and of hell; and though he had never thought
much about either of them, he had a kind of feeling that some day he
must go to one or other. Hell, he had heard, was for bad people, and
heaven for good ones; and though Solomon tried to persuade himself
that he belonged to the latter class, he could not quite come to that
opinion. There was something in his heart which told him all was not
right with him, and made the subject an unpleasant one. He wished Dot
would let it drop, and not talk to him any more about it; and then he
went into a reverie about Dot, and Dot's daisies, and all her pretty
ways.

It was the afternoon of the same day, and Dot was sitting beside her
little girl's grave, trying to make the daisies look more pretty by
putting some leaves among them, when she heard footsteps crossing the
broad gravel path. She jumped up, and peeped behind the trees to see
who was coming. It was the lady and gentleman whom she had seen at the
funeral, and they were coming to look at their little grave. Dot felt
very shy, but she could not run away without meeting them, so she hid
behind a hawthorn bush at the other side.

The little girl's papa and mamma came close to the grave, and Dot was
so near that, as they knelt down beside it, she could hear a great deal
of what they were saying. The lady was crying very much, and for some
time she did not speak. But the gentleman said—

"I wonder who has put those flowers here, my dear; how very pretty they
are!"

"Yes," said the lady, through her tears; "and the grave was full of
them yesterday."

"How pleased our little girl would have been!" said he. "She was so
fond of daisies! Who can have done it?"

Little Dot heard all this from her hiding-place, and she felt very
pleased that she had made her little girl's grave so pretty.

The lady cried a great deal as she sat by the grave; but just before
they left, Dot heard the gentleman say—

"Don't cry, dearest; remember what our little Lilian said the night
before she died."

"Yes," said the lady, "I will not forget."

And she dried her eyes, and Dot thought she tried to smile as she
looked up at the blue sky. Then she took a bunch of white violets which
she had brought with her, and put them in the middle of the grave,
but she did not move any of Dot's daisies, at which she looked very
lovingly and tenderly.

As soon as they were gone, Dot came out from behind the hawthorn bush.
She went up to her little girl's grave, and kneeling on the grass
beside it she smelt the white violets and stroked them with her tiny
hand. They made it look so much nicer, she thought; but she felt very
glad that the lady had liked her daisies. She would gather some fresh
ones to-morrow.

Dot walked home very slowly. She had so much to think over. She knew
her little girl's name now, and that she was fond of daisies. She would
not forget that. Dot felt very sorry for the poor lady; she wished she
could tell her so. And then she began to wonder what it was that her
little girl had said the night before she died. It must be something
nice, Dot thought, to make the lady wipe her eyes and try to smile.
Perhaps the little girl had said she did not mind being put into the
dark hole. Dot thought it could hardly be that, for she felt sure
she would mind it very much indeed. Dot was sure she would be very
frightened if she had to die, and old Solomon had to dig a grave for
her. No, it could not be that which Lilian had said. Perhaps Solomon
was right, and the little girl was asleep. If so, Dot hoped it would be
a long, long time before she woke up again.

Solomon had left his work, or Dot would have told him about what she
had seen. But it was tea-time now, and she must go home. Her mother was
standing at the door looking out for her, and she called to the child
to be quick and come in to tea.

Dot found her father at home, and they began their meal. But little Dot
was so quiet, and sat so still, that her father asked her what was the
matter. Then she thought she would ask him what she wanted to know, for
he was very kind to her, and generally tried to answer her questions.

So Dot told him about her little girl's grave, and what the lady and
gentleman had talked about, and she asked what he thought the little
girl had said, which had made her mother stop crying.

But Dot's father could not tell her. And when Dot said she was sure she
would not like to be put in a hole like that, her father only laughed,
and told her not to trouble her little head about it: she was too young
to think of such things.

"But my little girl was only just about as big as me," said Dot,
"'cause Mr. Solemn told me so."

That was an argument which her father could not answer, so he told Dot
to be quick over her supper, and get to bed. And when she was asleep,
he said to his wife that he did not think the cemetery was a good place
for his little girl to play in—it made her gloomy. But Dot's mother
said it was better than the street, and Dot was too light-hearted to be
dull long.

And whilst they were talking little Dot was dreaming of Lilian, and of
what she had said the night before she died.



CHAPTER V

DOT'S BUSY THOUGHTS

A DAY or two after, as Dot was putting fresh daisies on the little
grave, she felt a hand on her shoulder, and looking up she saw her
little girl's mamma. She had come up very quietly, and Dot was so
intent on what she was doing that she had not heard her. It was too
late to run away; but the lady's face was so kind and loving that the
child could not be afraid. She took hold of Dot's little hand, and sat
down beside her, and then she said very gently—

"Is this the little girl who gathered the daisies?"

"Yes," said Dot shyly, "it was me."

The lady seemed very pleased, and she asked Dot what her name was, and
where she lived. Then she said—

"Dot, what was it made you bring these pretty flowers here?"

"Please," said the child, "it was 'cause Mr. Solemn said she was ever
such a little girl—maybe about as big as me."

"Who is Mr. Solemn?" asked the lady.

[Illustration: "IS THIS THE LITTLE GIRL WHO GATHERED THE DAISIES?"]

"It's an old man—him as digs the graves; he made my little girl's
grave," said Dot, under her breath, "and he filled it up and all."

The tears came into the lady's eyes, and she stooped down and kissed
the child.

Dot was beginning to feel quite at home with the little girl's mamma,
and she stroked the lady's soft glove with her tiny hand.

They sat quite still for some time. Dot never moved, and the lady had
almost forgotten her—she was thinking of her own little girl. The tears
began to run down her cheeks, though she tried to keep them back, and
some of them fell upon Dot as she sat at her feet.

"I was thinking of my little girl," said the lady, as Dot looked
sorrowfully up to her face.

"Please," said Dot, "I wonder what your little girl said to you the
night before she died?" She thought perhaps it might comfort the lady
to think of it, as it had done so the other day.

The lady looked very surprised when Dot said this, as she had had no
idea that the little girl was near when she was talking to her husband.

"How did you know, Dot?" she asked.

"Please, I couldn't help it," said little Dot; "I was putting the
daisies."

"Yes?" said the lady, and she waited for the child to go on.

"And I ran in there," said Dot, nodding at the hawthorn bush. "I heard
you—and, please, don't be angry."

"I am not angry," said the lady.

Dot looked in her face, and saw she was gazing at her with a very sweet
smile.

"Then, please," said little Dot, "I would like very much to know what
the little girl said."

"I will tell you, Dot," said the lady. "Come and sit on my knee."

There was a flat tombstone close by, on which they sat whilst the
girl's mamma talked to Dot. She found it very hard to speak about her
child, it was so short a time since she had died. But she tried her
very best, for the sake of the little girl who had covered the grave
with daisies.

"Lilian was only ill a very short time," said the lady; "a week before
she died she was running about and playing—just as you have been doing
to-day, Dot. But she took a bad cold, and soon the doctor told me my
little girl must die."

"Oh," said Dot, with a little sob, "I am so sorry for the poor little
girl!"

"Lilian wasn't afraid to die, Dot," said the lady.

"Wasn't she?" said Dot. "I should be frightened ever so much—but maybe
she'd never seen Mr. Solemn bury anybody; maybe she didn't know she had
to go into that dark hole."

"Listen, Dot," said the lady, "and I will tell you what my little girl
said the night before she died."

"'Mamma,' she said, 'don't let Violet and Ethel think that I'm down
deep in the cemetery; but take them out, and show them the blue sky and
all the white clouds, and tell them, Little sister Lilian's up there
with Jesus.' Violet and Ethel are my other little girls, Dot."

"Yes," said Dot, in a whisper; "I saw them at the funeral."

"That is what my little girl said, which made me stop crying the other
day."

Dot looked very puzzled. There was a great deal that she wanted to
think over and to ask Solomon about.

The lady was obliged to go home, for it was getting late. She kissed
the child before she went, and said she hoped Dot would see her little
girl one day, above the blue sky.

Dot could not make out what the lady meant, nor what her little girl
had meant the night before she died. She wanted very much to hear more
about her, and she hoped the lady would soon come again.

"Mr. Solemn," said Dot the next day, as she was in her usual place on
the top of one of Solomon's graves, "didn't you say that my little girl
was in that long box?"

"Yes," said Solomon—"yes, Dot, I said so, I believe."

"But my little girl's mamma says she isn't in there, Mr. Solemn, and my
little girl said so the night before she died."

"Where is she, then?" said Solomon.

"She's somewhere up there," said Dot, pointing with her finger to the
blue sky.

"Oh, in heaven," said Solomon. "Yes, Dot, I suppose she is in heaven."

"How did she get there?" said Dot. "I want to know all about it, Mr.
Solemn."

"Oh, I don't know," said the old man. "Good folks always go to heaven."

"Shall you go to heaven, Mr. Solemn, when you die?"

"I hope I shall, Dot, I'm sure," said the old man. "But there, run away
a little; I want to tidy round a bit."

Now, Solomon had very often "tidied round," as he called it, without
sending little Dot away; but he did not want her to ask him any more
questions, and he hoped she would forget it before she came back.

But Dot had not forgotten. She had not even been playing; she had been
sitting on an old tombstone, thinking about what Solomon had said. And
as soon as he had finished the grave she ran up to him.

"Mr. Solemn," she said, "did she get out in the night?"

"Who get out?" said the old man, in a very puzzled voice.

"My little girl, Mr. Solemn. Did she get out that night, after you
covered her up, you know?"

"No," said Solomon, "she couldn't get out—how could she?"

"Then she's in there yet," said little Dot very sorrowfully.

"Yes, she's there, safe enough," said the grave-digger; "it's the last
home of man, is the grave, Dot."

"But, Mr. Solemn, you said she was in heaven," Dot went on, in a very
mournful little voice.

Solomon did not know how to answer her; indeed it was very puzzling to
himself. He wished he could think what to say to Dot; but nothing would
come to him, so he gave up the attempt, and tried to think of something
else.

But Dot's busy little mind was not satisfied. The little girl's mamma
must be right; and she had said she hoped Dot would see Lilian above
the blue sky. Dot wondered how she would get up above the sky.

"Mr. Solemn," she said one day, "don't you wish you were just like a
bird?"

"No," said the old man—"no, Dot; I'd rather be digging my graves."

"But, Mr. Solemn, they've got two wings," she went on.

"And what would you do with two wings, my little dear?" said the
grave-digger.

"I'd go right up into the sky, and look for my little girl," said Dot.

"Oh," said Solomon, "your thoughts are always running on that, Dot.
How's dolly to-day?"

But Dot had left her dolly at home—she had almost forgotten it the last
day or two.



CHAPTER VI

SOWING SEEDS

THE next week was very wet, and Dot's mother would not let her go into
the cemetery. So she sat at home by the fire with her doll upon her
knee, wondering what her little girl was doing, and whether she was
really in the sky. Then she listened to the rain pattering against the
window-panes, and thought how wet the little grave would be, and how
bare it must look, now there were no daisies upon it. Dot hoped very,
very much that her little girl was not inside.

Every time that Solomon passed to and from work, Dot was at the window
to nod to him. He missed her very much this rainy weather; but he had
to go on with his work in the cold and damp, just as usual. It was
a great cheer to the old man to see the little face at the window,
morning and evening; and sometimes Dot's mother was there too. Dot
would pull her by the apron when she saw her old friend coming.

"Mother," she would say, "here's my Mr. Solemn!"

And then her mother would run with her to the window, to see the old
grave-digger pass.

But as soon as the sunshine came, and the grass began to be dry, Dot
was by Solomon's side again. She walked with him to the cemetery,
though, as soon as they reached the gates, she ran quickly forward to
look at her little girl's grave. But when she got to the place she
stood still in amazement. It looked quite different from what it did
when she was there last. The sides of the grave were covered with nice
soft grass, which looked green and fresh after the rain. Then the top
of the grave was quite flat and smooth like a flower-bed, and in the
middle of it was a small rose tree.

Dot ran round the grave several times, to look at all these changes.
Then she sat beside it, and patted the grass, and smoothed the mound,
and admired the rose bush.

After a time she went to look for Solomon, to tell him what she had
found.

"Oh, Mr. Solemn," she cried, "my little girl's grave is ever so pretty!"

"Yes," he said, "I know it is, Dot; a man came and did it a week ago—I
think it was the lady's gardener. I thought I wouldn't tell you, my
little dear—you'd be more surprised like."

"Oh, Mr. Solemn, did you see the rose tree?"

"Yes, I saw it, Dot."

"Mr. Solemn, I know what I'll do; I'll put you a rose tree on your
grave when you die—a real nice one, I will."

The old man took her up in his arms and kissed her, and then he went on
with his usual work.

It was a bright summer's morning not long after, when Dot saw the
two little girls who had walked behind the lady and gentleman at the
funeral coming in at the cemetery gate. The elder of them had a green
watering-can in her hand, and her sister had a small covered basket.
Dot followed them at a little distance, and watched them going to the
quiet corner of the cemetery.

But before they went in among the trees they turned round and caught
sight of Dot. Their mamma had told them to look out for her, so they
came back to meet her.

"Are you Dot?" said the elder sister.

"Yes," said Dot shyly.

"Mamma told us about you," said Violet.

"And she thought you would help us," Ethel went on. "We're going to sow
some seeds on Lilian's grave—are we not, Violet?"

"Yes," said Violet. "Gardener wanted to do it, but papa says we may do
it quite by ourselves. Come, Dot, you shall walk with us."

So the three children went hand in hand to the little grave.

It was a long business sowing the seeds; but when the little brown
things were put safely in, and Dot had given the earth a last pat with
her hand, Violet said they must be watered.

"Dot," she said, "where can we get some water?"

Dot ran with the green watering-can to the pump near the cemetery
gates, and soon returned with the water, with which Violet carefully
watered the earth where the seeds had been put in.

"They ought to be watered every day," she said; "gardener always waters
his seeds every day. They won't spring up if they haven't enough water,
will they, Ethel? What are we to do about it?"

"Please, I'll do them," said little Dot.

"Oh, will you?" said Violet. "That will be a very good plan, won't it,
Ethel?"

"Yes," said her sister; "and we can leave Dot the small can."

"But you must hold it up as high as you can, Dot," said Violet, "and do
it very gently, or you will wash the seeds out of the ground. Do you
think you can manage?"

"Yes," said Dot gravely, as though impressed with the greatness of her
trust. "Will the little girl like them?" she asked, as they walked away.

"What little girl?" asked Ethel.

"Your little girl," said Dot, nodding in the direction of the grave.

"What, Lilian?" said Ethel. "Yes, I'm sure she will like them if she
knows. But, then, you see, I'm not quite sure if she does."

"Perhaps Jesus will let her fly down and look at them," said Violet.

"Oh, I don't think she would want to come, Violet," said her sister;
"she would have so many pretty flowers to look at up there."

"Then she is in the sky?" said Dot, standing quite still and fixing her
eyes earnestly on the two little girls.

"Yes," said Violet in a shocked voice; "didn't you know that, Dot? But
you're such a tiny little thing isn't she, Ethel?"

"But, please," said Dot eagerly, "I saw Mr. Solemn put her in, right
down among my daisies in a white box, and, please, I would so like to
know how she got out."

"She didn't get out," said Ethel.

"Because she never went in," Violet went on; "she told mamma so, you
know, before she died."

"Then, please," said Dot, "wasn't she in the little box?"

"Yes, she was—at least—no, she wasn't. I wish mamma was here," said
Ethel; "she could tell you how it was. That was her body, you know, in
here; her soul was in the sky."

"I don't quite see," said Dot, being puzzled.

"Why, this is your body, Dot," said Violet, taking hold of Dot's arm,
and giving it a little pat.

"But, please, that's my arm," said little Dot in a very bewildered
voice.

"Yes," explained Ethel, "but all this is your body, Dot—all over you;
your soul's inside somewhere, where you can't see it."

"I should like to see my soul," said little Dot.

"Oh, but you never could!" said Violet. "Could she, Ethel?"

"No, I think not," said Ethel. "Perhaps when we get to heaven we shall."



CHAPTER VII

THE LITTLE WHITE STONE

As soon as the two young ladies were gone, Dot hastened in search of
Mr. Solomon. She found him walking home to his dinner, his spade over
his shoulder; and, slipping her hand in his, she walked beside him, and
told him her morning's adventures.

"Please, Mr. Solemn," she said, "have you got a soul?"

"Why, yes," said Solomon; "everybody's got one—to be sure they have."

"Then they'll only put your body in the ground, Mr. Solemn? I'm so
glad—that won't matter so very much, will it?"

Solomon made no answer, so Dot went on—

"Shall you like your soul to go to heaven, Mr. Solemn?"

"Yes, child," said the old man; "it's a good place in heaven, so they
say."

"Shall you dig graves in heaven, Mr. Solemn?"

"No," said the old man with a laugh; "there are no graves in heaven.
There is 'no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying.'"

Solomon had learnt this verse at his mother's knee, years ago, and it
came back to him with a strange freshness which almost startled him.

Dot looked up in his face as she said brightly—

"What a very nice place heaven must be! But what will you do there, Mr.
Solemn, if you don't dig graves?"

"Why, sing, I suppose, Dot—sing hymns and such like."

"I didn't know you could sing, Mr. Solemn," said Dot with a laugh.
"You've got such an old voice, it all shakes about. But you and me must
help each other; that'll do, won't it?"



Never were plants more diligently watered than those on Lilian's grave;
and great was Dot's delight as she saw the little green shoots coming
one by one out of the ground.

But what was her surprise one morning, on going to the grave, to find
two men in her quiet corner. They were very busy, for they had brought
with them a small white marble stone for the little girl's grave.
Dot never left the place whilst they were there; she watched their
every movement with the deepest interest, and when they were gone she
examined the stone very carefully, though she could not read a word of
what was on it. But old Solomon put on his spectacles and made it out
for her.

"'Lilian Stanley,'" he began.

"That is my little girl's name," said Dot.

"'Died May 3, 1863, aged 6 years.'"

"Is that all?" asked little Dot.

"No; wait a minute," said the old man. "I'll tell you it all—here's
some reading at the bottom: 'White in the blood of the Lamb.' That's
all, Dot."

"What Lamb, Mr. Solemn?"

"Oh, I don't know, Dot; that's a text; it's in the Bible somewhere."

"I want to know all about it," said Dot impatiently. "Can't you tell
me, Mr. Solemn?"

But just then they heard a voice behind them, saying—

"Oh, that looks very well. I am so glad it is done!" and, looking up,
they saw the little girl's papa, with Violet having hold of his hand.

Solomon touched his hat respectfully, and moved away; but Dot stayed
behind, for she wanted to hear about the text on the little girl's
grave.

"'White in the blood of the Lamb,'" read Mr. Stanley aloud.

"What Lamb?" asked little Dot simply.

"The dear Lord Jesus," said the gentleman. "My little girl would never
have got to heaven if He had not washed her in His blood. And now
Lilian wears a white robe, made white in the blood of the Lamb. Yes, my
children," he went on, taking the little girls by the hand, "there is
no other way to the bright land above the sky; there is no other way
to get rid of your sin—and no sin can enter into heaven. But Jesus has
loved you, and shed His blood for you, and He can wash you whiter than
snow."

"Will He wash me?" said little Dot.

"I am sure He will, my child, if you ask Him," said the gentleman.

Then he took the two little girls to a seat on the gravel path not far
away, and he taught them this short prayer:

     "'Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.'"

And that prayer was treasured up in little Dot's heart.

Over and over again she repeated it as she walked home, and many times
she said it during the day. And when Dot's mother came to look at her
child in bed, little Dot turned over in her sleep, and she heard the
words again, "Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow."



CHAPTER VIII

THE FADING DAISY

THE autumn came on very early that year. There were cold east winds,
which swept among the trees of the cemetery, and scattered their leaves
on the ground. Then there were thick mists and drizzling rains, and
each morning and evening the dew fell heavily on the grass. And now
and then there was a slight frost, which nipped the geraniums and the
fuchsias and all the flowers which had been so bright through the
summer.

It grew very damp and chilly in the cemetery, but Dot was still in her
place at Solomon's side. She was very pale and thin, he thought; and he
fancied she shivered sometimes as she stood on the damp grass. He would
wrap her up in his old great-coat very tenderly as she sat on the cold
stone near him, and he would tell her to run about to warm herself many
times in the day.

But Dot was not so fond of running about as she used to be. She had
been very tired lately, and she would soon come back to him, and stand
beside him at his work, talking to him in her pretty childish way.

He liked to hear her talk, and he was never dull when she was with him.
She had taught him her little prayer, and old Solomon could say it as
well as she could. As for Dot, it was seldom out of her thoughts, and
Solomon often found her kneeling amongst the trees of the cemetery, and
"asking the dear Lord Jesus," as she called praying.

But Dot's mother often sent for her in, for she noticed that her child
was not well. She had a tiresome little cough, which often kept her
awake by night, and distressed old Solomon by day. He walked into the
town, poor old man, on purpose to buy her some lozenges, which he heard
had cured a neighbour of his. He thought they might make his little
dear's cold well.

But Dot's cough still continued, and grew worse instead of better. At
last her father took her to a doctor, and he gave her some medicine,
and said she must be kept warm. So Dot's mother kept her at home, and
she could only kiss her hand to Solomon as he passed the window to his
work. He came to see her in the evenings, for she fretted so much for
him that her mother invited him to come as often as he could.

"Mr. Solemn," she said one day, "I know all about it now."

"About what, my dear?" asked the old man.

"About my little girl, and heaven, and Jesus, Mr. Solemn. Has He washed
you, Mr. Solemn?"

"I don't know, my dear," he replied.

"Cause you can't go to heaven if He doesn't, Mr. Solemn."

"No, I suppose not," said the old man. "There's a many things in me as
ought to be different—I know that, Dot."

"You will say my little prayer, won't you, Mr. Solemn?" said Dot.

"Yes, Dot, I will," said the old man; "God helping me, I will."

She was teaching him many lessons, was this little child; and now that
he saw her slipping away from his sight, each day growing more thin and
pale, he felt as if his heart would break.

Violet and Ethel, and their papa and mamma, often came to see Dot, and
brought her tempting things to eat—jellies, and grapes, and cooling
drinks.

Dot was very pleased to see them, and would look out of the window for
their coming for hours together.

But the flower was fading very quickly. Dot was taken suddenly worse,
and even her mother knew that her little girl would not be long with
her. She was very tender to Dot now; she would hold her little girl
in her arms for hours together, for Dot was very weary, and liked to
lie quite still, with her head on her mother's shoulder. And at length
there came a long, sorrowful day, when Dot's father stayed away from
work, and Dot's mother sat all day beside the little bed, which they
had brought down for the child to lie upon.

It was evening, and little Dot was sinking fast. She had scarcely
spoken all day, except to murmur her little prayer; but now old Solomon
had come in, after his day's work, and was sitting beside her, holding
her tiny hand in his.

She opened her eyes and smiled at him.

"Mr. Solemn," she asked, "have you said it?"

"Said what, my dear?" replied the old man.

"My little prayer, Mr. Solemn."

"Yes, my dear—yes, Dot; I've said it many a time, and, what's more, my
dear, I'm an old sinner, but I do believe the Lord's heard me, and done
it for me; I do believe He has."

"I'm so glad," said little Dot; and she smiled as she said it.

He stayed with her till it was quite late, and when he was coming away
she said wearily—

"I'm so tired, Mr. Solemn."

"Are you, my dear?" said the old man.

"Please, Mr. Solemn, say my little prayer for me to-night."

Solomon knelt down by the side of the bed. Dot's father and mother
knelt beside him, and little Dot clasped her hands and shut her eyes,
whilst the old man prayed in a trembling voice—

"Lord, dear Lord, wash us all to-night, and we shall be whiter than
snow. Wash me, and little Dot, and Dot's father and mother, for Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen."

Then he kissed Dot, and came away with a troubled heart.

The next morning, as he went to his work, he heard that his little girl
was dead.

"What! My little little darling gone!"



CHAPTER IX

OLD SOLOMON'S HOPE

THERE was a little grave to be dug that day, and it was the hardest
task old Solomon ever had. The earth seemed to him as heavy as lead
that morning; many a time he stopped and moaned, as if he could work no
more. He sometimes looked up, as if he half expected to see his little
Dot standing at the top of the grave. He almost thought he heard her
merry laugh, and her dear little voice saying, "Won't you say my little
prayer, Mr. Solemn?"

But this was his little Dot's grave, and she was dead. It could not be
true; oh, it could not be true!

But, as the old man toiled on, a happier thought stole into his old
soul, and he thought he saw his little Dot, dressed in white, and
walking with the angels, near the dear Lord, in the home above the blue
sky. And it did old Solomon good to think of this.

The grave was close to Lilian's; side by side they were to lie, for so
Lilian's father had ordered it. For he loved little Dot for the care
she had taken of his child's grave.

It was the day of the funeral—little Dot's funeral. Old Solomon was
wandering among the trees of the cemetery, and every now and then
stooping wearily to gather something from the ground. He was getting
daisies to put in his little dear's grave. They were very scarce now,
and it gave him much trouble to collect them, and they looked very poor
and frost-bitten when he put them together, but they were the best he
could find, and, with trembling hands, he threw them into the little
grave.

It was a very quiet funeral. The gentleman and lady and their two
little girls came to it, and Dot's father and mother, and old Solomon
did his sorrowful part.

And they looked down into the grave at the little white coffin lying
amongst the daisies. Then all was over, and the robin sang his song on
little Dot's grave.

Lilian's father ordered a stone exactly like that which he had put to
his own child—a small white marble stone, and on the stone were these
words—

     "LITTLE DOT,"

and underneath was Dot's text:

     "WASH ME, AND I SHALL BE WHITER THAN SNOW."

Old Solomon toiled on, often lonely and sad. The neighbours said he was
getting childish, for he often fancied that his little Dot was alive,
and he would look up from the graves and smile at her, as he used to
do when she stood at the top. And he often thought he heard her little
voice whispering among the trees of the cemetery. And the words she
whispered were always those of her little prayer.

So Solomon grew to think of her as alive, and not dead, and it
comforted his old heart.

"For," said he, "it will not be very long before I shall see her again."

Thus Solomon was troubled no longer at the thought of his own grave, or
of who should dig it.

And the people who came to the cemetery often looked at the two little
graves, and read the two lovely texts.



                             THE END



  Printed by
  MORRISON AND GIBB LIMITED
  Edinburgh







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANGEL'S CHRISTMAS, AND, LITTLE DOT ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


